How to write accessible forms (#1108)
a11yproject/a11yproject.com: src/posts/2020-09-19-how-to-write-accessible-forms.md

    source:  Havard university
    year: 2014
  - title: HTML label element reference
    url: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/label
    source: MDN web docs
    year: 2020
  - title: Don’t Use The Placeholder Attribute
    url: https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2018/06/placeholder-attribute/
    source: Smashing Magazine
    year: 2018
  - title: "HTML5 Accessibility Chops: the placeholder attribute"
    url: https://developer.paciellogroup.com/blog/2011/02/html5-accessibility-chops-the-placeholder-attribute/
    source: The Paciello Group
    year: 2011
  - title: Using @placeholder on Input
    url: https://www.w3.org/WAI/GL/wiki/Using_@placeholder_on_input
    source: W3C
    year: 2012
eleventyNavigation:
  key: {{ category }}
  title: {{ title }}
tags:
  - howto
---

With the world becoming data reliant, it's no surprise how data is the new gold. With the right data, you can improve peoples' lives, find solutions to problems and so on. There are many ways to capture peoples' data but on the web, forms are your go-to solution.

Here are some  practical tips on how to write accessible forms.

> ## Always label your forms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Always label your form inputs
```

Labels are a great way to get started with writing accessible forms. They are vital for helping people who use [screen readers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Screen_reader) and other kinds of assistive technology determine what label text go with what input field.

To associate a `<label>` with an `<input>`, set the identifier(ID) in the `<input>` to correspond with the `for` attribute of the `<label>`. This is the generally accepted approach.
```html
<form>
  <label for="firstName">First Name</label>
  <input type="text" id="firstName" name="firtName"/>
</form>
```

> **Note**: It is adviceful not to nest `<input>` directly inside `<label>` because some assistive devices (such as [Dragon NaturallySpeaking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dragon_NaturallySpeaking)) do not support it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: Do not to nest `<input>` inside of `<label>` because some assistive technology (such as [Dragon NaturallySpeaking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dragon_NaturallySpeaking)) do not support it.
```

![A form with an input field highlighted in blue.](../img/posts/2020-09-19-how-to-write-accessible-forms/form-field-on-focus.png)

```css
input:focus {
  outline: 2px solid royalblue;
  box-shadow: 1px 1px 8px 1px royalblue;
}
```

## Break long forms into smaller sections

Filling long forms can be stressful. This is largely true for almost everyone but particularity for people  with [AD/HD](https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/adhd/facts.html). Such forms can lead to an increase in [Bounce rate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bounce_rate) which isn't what anyone wants. A simple solution is to break them into smaller sections. This helps make long forms less daunting and easier to understand as it is provided in bits.

The following principles apply for multi-step forms:

- Repeat overall instruction on every page.
- The forms should be split into logical groups.
- The forms should inform the person about the progress thay are making.

> **Note**: There are no hard rules that defines a long form. However, you should consider if the form can be broken down into different logical sections.

Reviewer: I really like this update!

## Provide error messages

> When people encounter errors, they may need help to determine what's wrong and why. A common way forms indicate invalid fields is to change the `<input>` border color to red which is not ideal. The reason for this is because a change in color alone is not exposed to assistive technologies, so indicating errors in such ways will not inform the person of the error.

Reviewer: Might also want to add that relying on color alone may also not work for someone who is red/green colorblind.

```html
<form>
  <label for="username">Enter a username</label>
  <input type="text" id="username">
  <p class="hint hidden" id="usernameHint" >Your username cannot contain punctuation</p>

  <label for="email">Enter your email address</label>
  <input type="text" id="email">
  <p class="hint hidden" id="emailHint">Please enter a valid email address</p>

  <label for="password">Enter a password</label>
  <input type="password" id="password">
  <p class="hint hidden" id="passwordHint">Your password must be at least 6 characters</p>

  <div aria-live="assertive" id="message"></div>
 
  <button type="submit">Submit</button>
</form>
```

```css
.hidden {
  display: none
}

.hint {
  color: red;
}
```
If validation errors occur, two things happen:

1. The [live region](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Live_Regions) is populated upon form submission, announcing to assistive devices that there are errors.

> 

Reviewer: Removing this empty space will make the markdown parser render these two bullet points as an ordered list.

> 2. Each invalid `<input>` is given an [aria-invalid="true"](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_aria-invalid_attribute) attribute and connected to a __hint__ using  an [aria-describedby](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_aria-describedby_attribute) attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Each invalid `<input>` is given an [aria-invalid="true"](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_aria-invalid_attribute) attribute and connected to a __hint__ using  an [`aria-describedby`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_aria-describedby_attribute) attribute.

```

> 2. Each invalid `<input>` is given an [aria-invalid="true"](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_aria-invalid_attribute) attribute and connected to a __hint__ using  an [aria-describedby](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_aria-describedby_attribute) attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Each invalid `<input>` is given an [aria-invalid="true"](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_aria-invalid_attribute) attribute and connected to a __hint__ using  an [`aria-describedby`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_aria-describedby_attribute) attribute.

```

> Here's the markup for the email field in its invalid state:

Reviewer: Add an empty line after this paragraph and before your code example so the markdown parser will render the code block.

```html
<label for="email">Your email</label>
<input type="text" id="email" aria-invalid="true" aria-describedby="emailHint">
<p class="hint" id="emailHint">Invalid email address.</p>
```

> ## Avoid horizontal layout forms unless neccessary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Avoid horizontal form layout unless necessary
```

Layout attributes a great deal  to the usability of a site. With CSS, changing a form's visual layout is possible. However, changing the visual layout create problems for people who rely on the structural layout of the page. Because of this, your forms should have a meaningful and logical sequence. If possible, avoid making your form inputs next to each other. This is because people have to spend a little more time correlating the labels with their elements, resulting in slower form completion.

## Summary

Accessible forms are important because they help both individuals and businesses thrive by making sure they collect data from the widest possible audience. This, in the long run, leads to growth.

 The following are tips on how to create accessible forms:

> - Always label your forms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Always label your inputs.
```

    source: Smashing Magazine
    year: 2018
  - title: "HTML5 Accessibility Chops: the placeholder attribute"
    url: https://developer.paciellogroup.com/blog/2011/02/html5-accessibility-chops-the-placeholder-attribute/
    source: The Paciello Group
    year: 2011
  - title: Using @placeholder on Input
    url: https://www.w3.org/WAI/GL/wiki/Using_@placeholder_on_input
    source: W3C
    year: 2012
eleventyNavigation:
  key: {{ category }}
  title: {{ title }}
tags:
  - howto
---

With the world becoming data reliant, it's no surprise how data is the new gold. With the right data, you can improve peoples' lives, find solutions to problems and so on. There are many ways to capture peoples' data but on the web, forms are your go-to solution.

Here are some  practical tips on how to write accessible forms.

## Always label your forms

Labels are a great way to get started with writing accessible forms. They are vital for helping people who use [screen readers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Screen_reader) and other kinds of assistive technology determine what label text go with what input field.

There are two ways to associate a `<label>` with an `<input>`.

> - Set the identifier(ID) in the `<input>` to correspond with the `for` attribute of the `<label>`.

Reviewer: With the second example removed this can become a paragraph instead of a bulleted list.

```html
<form>
  <label for="firstName">First Name</label>
  <input type="text" id="firstName" name="firtName"/>
</form>
```

- Nest `<input>` directly inside `<label>`.
```html
<form>
  <label>
    First Name
    <input type="text" name="firstName">
  </label>
</form>
```

> **Note**: The first method is the preffered approach to associate a label with a form control . Additionally, some assistive devices (such as [Dragon NaturallySpeaking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dragon_NaturallySpeaking)) do not support the latter.

Reviewer: I'd like to remove this code example completely, and then have the paragraph updated to speak as to why we don't use the nesting approach. Many readers will skim, and not red and therefore think the code we show them is usable.

## Highlight input element on focus

Form insertion [carets](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/caret#:~:text=A%20caret%20sometimes%20called%20a,is%20called%20the%20insertion%20point.) can be difficult to track. A simple solution is to highlight `<input>` on [focus](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/:focus). This way, people do not have to guess where they are on the form. 

![A form with an input field highlighted in blue.](../img/posts/2020-09-19-how-to-write-accessible-forms/form-field-on-focus.png)

```css
input:focus{
  outline: 2px solid royalblue;
  box-shadow: 1px 1px 8px 1px royalblue;
}
```

## Break long forms into smaller sections

> Filling long forms can be stressful. This is largely true for almost everyone but particularity for people  with [AD/HD](https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/adhd/facts.html). Such forms can lead to an increase in [Bounce rate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bounce_rate) which isn't what anyone wants. A simple solution is to break them into smaller sections. 

Reviewer: What's the difference between a long form and a short form? A little more clarity would be helpful.

This helps make long forms less daunting and easier to understand as it is provided in bits.

The following principles apply for multi-step forms:
- Repeat overall instruction on every page.
- The forms should be split into logical groups.
- The forms should inform the person about the progress thay are making.

> ## Provide error messages if any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Provide error messages
```

If your site has forms, validation messaging and errors are inevitable.

> When people encounter errors, clearly they need more help. Some people, like the visually impaired, may not even be aware that an error has occurred. It is common practice to change `<input>` color to red which is not ideal. This is because assistive devices will not catch the error, hence not informing the person of the error.

Reviewer: I would like to remove the word "clearly" as it's an assumptive phrase. If there is validation error messaging shown, that's more a reflection on the quality of your form than the user.

> When people encounter errors, clearly they need more help. Some people, like the visually impaired, may not even be aware that an error has occurred. It is common practice to change `<input>` color to red which is not ideal. This is because assistive devices will not catch the error, hence not informing the person of the error.

Reviewer: I think this paragraph could be flipped so it reads:

1. Common practice is to use only a red color for inputs
2. Not everyone can see or understand the significance of that
3. Error messages help those people out
4. Error messages should be helpful when shown

> The following are ways to effectively and accessibly communicate form errors:

Reviewer: Our style is to use an empty space between paragraphs and lists.

- Let the person know there is an error.
- Let the person access the error, and provide instructions on how to fix it.
- Allow the person re-submit the form.

> 

Reviewer: Extra space.

> In the code below, there is an empty [live region](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Live_Regions) which report errors to assistive technologies. Additionally, each field is followed by a _hint_ which is hidden by default but shown if that field does not validate.

Reviewer: @scottaohara What's your take on a live region for error reporting versus updating the `title` element and an input error summary section?

```html
<form>
  <label for="username">Enter a username</label>
  <input type="text" id="username">
  <p class="hint hidden" id="usernameHint" >Your username cannot contain punctuation</p>

  <label for="email">Enter your email address</label>
  <input type="text" id="email">
  <p class="hint hidden" id="emailHint">Please enter a valid email address</p>

  <label for="password">Enter a password</label>
  <input type="password" id="password">
  <p class="hint hidden" id="passwordHint">Your password must be at least 6 characters</p>

  <div aria-live="assertive" id="message"></div>
 
  <button type="submit">Submit</button>
</form>
```

```css

> .hidden{

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.hidden {
```

  display: none
}

> .hint{

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.hint {
```

  color: red;
}
```

> If validation errors occur, two things happen:

Reviewer: New line after a paragraph.

> - First, the [live region](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Live_Regions) is populated upon form submission, announcing to assistive devices that there are errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The [live region](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Live_Regions) is populated upon form submission, announcing to assistive devices that there are errors.

```

> 

Reviewer: Remove this this is rendered as one contiguous list.

> - Second, each invalid `<input>` is given an [aria-invalid="true"](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_aria-invalid_attribute) attribute and connected to a __hint__ using  an [aria-describedby](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_aria-describedby_attribute) attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Each invalid `<input>` is given an [aria-invalid="true"](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_aria-invalid_attribute) attribute and connected to a __hint__ using  an [aria-describedby](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_aria-describedby_attribute) attribute.

```

Here's the markup for the email field in its invalid state:
```html
<label for="email">Your email</label>
<input type="text" id="email" aria-invalid="true" aria-describedby="emailHint">
<p class="hint" id="emailHint">Invalid email address.</p>
```

## Avoid horizontal layout forms unless neccessary

> Layout attributes a great deal  to the usability of a site. With CSS, changing a form's visual layout is possible. However, changing the visual layout [create problems](https://youtu.be/8MAvH6vYbDo) for people who rely on the structural layout of the page. As a rule of thumb, your forms should have a meaningful and logical sequence. If possible, avoid making your form inputs next to each other. This is because people have to spend a little more time correlating the labels with their elements, resulting in slower form completion

Reviewer: Instead of:

>As a rule of thumb, your forms should have a meaningful and logical sequence.

Can we use:

>Because of this, your forms should have a meaningful and logical sequence.

The term "as a rule of thumb" has associations with domestic abuse.

>  

Reviewer: We can delete this.

    year: 2011
  - title: Using @placeholder on Input
    url: https://www.w3.org/WAI/GL/wiki/Using_@placeholder_on_input
    source: W3C
    year: 2012
eleventyNavigation:
  key: {{ category }}
  title: {{ title }}
tags:
  - howto
---

With the world becoming data reliant, it's no surprise how data is the new gold. With the right data, you can improve peoples' lives, find solutions to problems and so on. There are many ways to capture users' data but on the web, forms are your go-to solution.

Here are some  practical tips on how to write accessible forms.

## Always label your forms
Labels are a great way to get started with writing accessible forms. They are vital for visually impaired people as they help [screen readers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Screen_reader) determine what label text go with what input field.

There are two ways to associate a `<label>` with an `<input>`.
- Set the identifier(ID) in the `<input>` to correspond with the `for` attribute of the `<label>`.
```html
<form>
    <label for="firstName">First Name</label>
    <input type="text" id="firstName" name="firtName"/>
</form>
```

- Nest `<input>` directly inside `<label>`.
```html
<form>

>     <label>

Reviewer 2: note that Dragon Naturally speaking software particularly hates this pattern.  the previous one should be noted as the preferred method to associate a label with a form control

        First Name
        <input type="text" name="firstName">
    </label>
</form>
```

## Highlight input element on focus

> Form cusors can be difficult to track. A simple solution is to highlight `<input>` on focus. This way, people do not have to guess where they are on the form. 

Reviewer: Could we link to [the MDN page for focus](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/:focus)? for the word "focus"? It could be helpful to clarify this technical topic, for those who need more information.

> ![A form with an input field highlighted in blue.](https://res.cloudinary.com/dgn6edv1k/image/upload/v1600204220/a11y_anz7bn.png)

Reviewer: Please add the image to a subdirectory created within [/img/posts/](https://github.com/a11yproject/a11yproject.com/tree/main/src/img/posts), with the subdirectory using the same name as the post's markdown filename.

We do this so we have control over our blog post assets in place of a 3rd party.

```css
input:focus{

>     outline: 2px solid royalblue

Reviewer 2: these rules are missing ending ;s

    box-shadow: 1px 1px 8px 1px royalblue
}
```

## Break long forms into smaller sections

> Filling long forms can be stressful. This is relatably true for almost everyone but perculiar to people  with [AD/HD](https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/adhd/facts.html).  They can lead to an increase in [Bounce rate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bounce_rate) which is not ideal. A simple solution is to break them into smaller sections. These sections should include a progress bar.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Filling long forms can be stressful. This is largely true for almost everyone but peculiarly for people with [AD/HD](https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/adhd/facts.html).  Such forms can lead to an increase in [Bounce rate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bounce_rate) (i.e., people abandoning the form) which isn't what anyone wants. A simple solution is to break them into smaller sections. These sections could include a progress bar to indicate how far along a user is in the form process.

```

Reviewer 2: made some wording suggestions here.  this could still stand to have more factual information behind it.  e.g., _why_ is it better to split a form into various different parts.  it's still a long form, just now spread across multiple screens.  so _how_ is that helpful?   info like this would be useful.

Reviewer: It sounds like you're talking about the [progressive disclosure pattern](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/progressive-disclosure/). If we're going to be recommending this, it would be helpful to include a little more detail about when and when not to utilize this pattern.

![A Multi page form with a progress bar at the top.](https://res.cloudinary.com/dgn6edv1k/image/upload/v1600197013/progress_wl7bgp.png)

## Provide error messages if any

> If your site has forms, validation errors are inevitable. Always provide error messages when they occur. It is common practice to change the `<input>` color to red which is not ideal. Error messages helps people know exactly what they need to submit the form. 

Reviewer 2: say "why" changing the color to red is not ideal.

> If your site has forms, validation errors are inevitable. Always provide error messages when they occur. It is common practice to change the `<input>` color to red which is not ideal. Error messages helps people know exactly what they need to submit the form. 

Reviewer: I would like to see some language about programmatically associating an error message with its input. 

Additionally, what are your thoughts about the pattern of including a summary area for multiple input validation errors on a form?

![A form with two fields indicating an error.](https://res.cloudinary.com/dgn6edv1k/image/upload/v1600197951/err_qiuycf.jpg)

## Avoid horizontal layout forms unless neccessary

> If possible, avoid making your form inputs next to each other. This allows people to follow the path to completion easily and focus on entering one piece of data at a time. 

Reviewer: How does this allow for easier path completion?

![A form with four input fields in a horizontal layout.](https://res.cloudinary.com/dgn6edv1k/image/upload/v1600201124/layout_glyubv.jpg)

> If you must use a horizontal layout, make sure the tab order goes from left to right. This is done by adding a  `tabindex` attribute to `<input>`. The `tabindex` attribute should be in ascending order(1,2,3 and so on).

Reviewer 2: strongly oppose the suggestion to use positive tabindex attributes.  based on the image uploaded, there's absolutely no reason to do this.  Just have the DOM order have the inputs in the proper order.   Including tabindexes on these would force keyboard focus to go to these inputs first AND THEN return to the top of the document where no positive tabindexes were set to focusable elements

![A form with an input field highlighted in blue.](../img/posts/2020-09-19-how-to-write-accessible-forms/form-field-on-focus.png)

```css
input:focus{
  outline: 2px solid royalblue;
  box-shadow: 1px 1px 8px 1px royalblue;
}
```

## Break long forms into smaller sections

Filling long forms can be stressful. This is largely true for almost everyone but perculiarly for people  with [AD/HD](https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/adhd/facts.html). Such forms can lead to an increase in [Bounce rate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bounce_rate) which isin't what anyone wants. A simple solution is to break them into smaller sections. 
This helps make long forms less dauting and easier to understand as it is provided in bits.

The following principles apply for multi-step forms:
- Repeat overall instruction on every page.
- The forms should be split into logical groups.
- The forms should inform the person about the progress thay are making.

## Provide error messages if any

If your site has forms, validation errors are inevitable.

> When people encounter errors, clearly they need more help. Some people, like the visually impaired, may not even be aware that an error has occurred. It is common practice to change `<input>` color to red which is not ideal. This is because assistive devices will not catch the error, hence not informing the person of the error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When people encounter errors, they may need help to determine what's wrong and why. A common way forms indicate invalid fields is to change the `<input>` border color to red which is not ideal. The reason for this is because a change in color alone is not exposed to assistive technologies, so indicating errors in such ways will not inform the person of the error.

```

The following are ways to effectively and accessibly communicate form errors:
- Let the person know there is an error.
- Let the person access the error, and provide instructions on how to fix it.
- Allow the person re-submit the form.

> In the code below, there is an empty [live region](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Live_Regions) which report errors to assistive devices. Additionally, each field is followed by a _hint_ which is hidden by default but shown if that field does not validate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the code below, there is an empty [live region](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Live_Regions) which report errors to assistive technologies. Additionally, each field is followed by a _hint_ which is hidden by default but shown if that field does not validate.

```

```html
<form>

>   <fieldset>

Reviewer 2: why do we need a fieldset/legend to wrap the contents of the form?  this seems unnecessary for such a basic form.

    <legend>Create a free account</legend>
    <label for="username">Enter a username</label>
    <input type="text" id="username">
    <p class="hint hidden" id="usernameHint" >Your username cannot contain punctuation</p>

    <label for="email">Enter your email address</label>
    <input type="text" id="email">
    <p class="hint hidden" id="emailHint">Please enter a valid email address</p>

    <label for="password">Enter a password</label>
    <input type="password" id="password">
    <p class="hint hidden" id="passwordHint">Your password must be at least 6 characters</p>
  </fieldset>

  <div aria-live="assertive" id="message"></div>
 
  <button type="submit">Submit</button>
  
</form>
```

```css
.hidden{

>   text-indent: -5000px;

Reviewer 2: in this instance, this is not a proper way to hide validation messaging.   

someone using a screen reader, navigating by the virtual cursor, would be able to come across these error messages as they traverse the DOM.  `display: none`, or simply NOT populating the containing element with text would be the best way to setup error messaging prior to the field being flagged as invalid.

Additionally, it would be worth noting that name and password specifically are introducing requirements that would otherwise be unknown to people trying to fill out this form.  This would fall into the area of failing 3.3.2 if these instructions were not provided _while_ the person was trying to fill out the form, rather than merely when they've already messed up.

}

.hint{
  color: red;
}
```
If validation errors occur, two things happen:

> - First, the [live region](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Live_Regions) is populated, announcing to assistive devices that there are errors.

Reviewer 2: when is it populated?  on form submit?

## Provide error messages if any

If your site has forms, validation messaging and errors are inevitable.

> <<<<<<< HEAD

Reviewer 2: these diffs unfortunately need to be resolved
